# **Loops and Conditional Rendering** <!-- omit in toc -->

- This section will guide you on how to use loops and conditionally render elements in Angular.
- How to use `*ngFor` directive to loop through an array of elements.
- How to use `*ngIf` directive to conditionally render elements.
- How to use `*ngSwitch` directive to conditionally render elements based on a condition.
- Using modern syntax for loops and conditional rendering `@for`, `@if` and `@switch`.

## **Table of Contents** <!-- omit in toc -->

- [**Loops**](#loops)
  - [**Using `*ngFor` Directive**](#using-ngfor-directive)
  - [**Using `@for`**](#using-for)
- [**Conditional Rendering**](#conditional-rendering)
  - [**Using `*ngIf` Directive**](#using-ngif-directive)
  - [**Using `@if`**](#using-if)

## **Loops**

Assume we have an array containing 5 users and we need to display them on the page. We can do so by adding the element 5 times in html and changing the data for each element which may look like this:

```typescript
@Component({
  selector: 'app-root',
  template: `
    <div>
      <app-user [user]="users[0]"></app-user>
      <app-user [user]="users[1]"></app-user>
      <app-user [user]="users[2]"></app-user>
      <app-user [user]="users[3]"></app-user>
      <app-user [user]="users[4]"></app-user>
    </div>
  `
})
export class AppComponent {
  users = [
    { name: 'John', age: 25 },
    { name: 'Jane', age: 22 },
    { name: 'Doe', age: 30 },
    { name: 'Smith', age: 28 },
    { name: 'Alex', age: 35 }
  ];
}
```

But as the number of users increases, the code will become more complex and difficult to manage. This might get worst if we have to display 100 users. To solve this problem, Angular provides a directive called `*ngFor` which can be used to loop through an array of elements and display them on the page.

**[⬆️ back to top](#table-of-contents)**

### **Using `*ngFor` Directive**

To loop through an array of elements, we can use the `*ngFor` directive in the template. The `*ngFor` directive takes an array of elements and loops through each element in the array. The syntax for `*ngFor` directive is as follows:

```html
<div *ngFor="let user of users">
  <app-user [user]="user"></app-user>
</div>
```

In the above code, `let user of users` is the syntax for `*ngFor` directive. The `let user` is a local variable that holds the current element in the array, and `users` is the array of elements that we want to loop through. The `*ngFor` directive will loop through each element in the `users` array and display it on the page.

However, the above code will not work as we need to add `NgFor` to the `imports` array in the `@NgModule` decorator in the `app.module.ts` file. The `NgFor` is a built-in Angular directive that is used to loop through an array of elements.

```typescript
import { NgModule } from '@angular/core';
import { NgFor } from '@angular/common';
import { BrowserModule } from '@angular/platform-browser';
import { AppComponent } from './app.component';

@NgModule({
  imports: [BrowserModule, NgFor],
  declarations: [AppComponent],
  bootstrap: [AppComponent]
})
export class AppModule {}
```

The `*ngFor` directive can also be used with an index to get the index of the current element in the array. The syntax for using an index with `*ngFor` directive is as follows:

```html
<div *ngFor="let user of users; let i = index">
  <app-user [user]="user" [index]="i"></app-user>
</div>
```

In the above code, `let i = index` is the syntax for getting the index of the current element in the array. The `i` variable holds the index of the current element in the array, and we can use it to display the index of the element on the page.

Local variables available in `*ngFor` directive:
- `index`: The index of the current item in the array.
- `first`: A boolean value that is true if the current item is the first item in the array.
- `last`: A boolean value that is true if the current item is the last item in the array.
- `even`: A boolean value that is true if the index of the current item is even.
- `odd`: A boolean value that is true if the index of the current item is odd.
- `trackBy`: A function that returns a unique identifier for each item in the array.

There are many other ways to use the `*ngFor` directive in Angular. For more information on how to use the `*ngFor` directive, you can refer to the [Angular documentation](https://angular.dev/api/common/NgForOf?tab=usage-notes).

**[⬆️ back to top](#table-of-contents)**

### **Using `@for`**

Angular provides a modern syntax for loops called `@for` which can be used to loop through an array of elements and display them on the page. The syntax for `@for` directive is as follows:

```html
@for (user of users; track user.id) {
  <app-user [user]="user"></app-user>
}
```

In the above code, `@for (user of users; track user.id)` is the syntax for `@for` directive. The `user` is a local variable that holds the current element in the array, and `users` is the array of elements that we want to loop through. The `@for` directive will loop through each element in the `users` array and display it on the page. The `track user.id` is used to track the elements in the array by their unique identifier which helps Angular to optimize the rendering process.

Similar to `*ngFor` directive, the `@for` directive also provides local variables that can be used to get additional information about the current element in the array. The local variables available in the `@for` directive are the same as the `*ngFor` directive.

```html
@for (user of users; let i = $index; even as isEven) {
  <app-user [user]="user" [index]="i" [isEvent]="isEven"></app-user>
}
```

In the above code, `$index` is used to get the index of the current element in the array, and `isEven` is used to check if the index of the current element is even. The `i` variable holds the index of the current element in the array, and `isEven` is a boolean value that is true if the index of the current element is even. The above example also shows different ways to access the local variables in the `@for` directive.

Local variables available in `@for` directive:
- `index`: The index of the current item in the array.
- `first`: A boolean value that is true if the current item is the first item in the array.
- `last`: A boolean value that is true if the current item is the last item in the array.
- `even`: A boolean value that is true if the index of the current item is even.
- `odd`: A boolean value that is true if the index of the current item is odd.
- `count`: The total number of items in the array.

The `@for` directive is a modern syntax for loops in Angular and provides a more concise and readable way to loop through an array of elements. For more information on how to use the `@for` directive, you can refer to the [Angular documentation](https://angular.dev/api/core/@for).

**[⬆️ back to top](#table-of-contents)**

## **Conditional Rendering**

Assume we have a user object with a property `isAdmin` which is a boolean value. We need to display a message on the page if the user is an admin.

### **Using `*ngIf` Directive**

To conditionally render elements based on a condition, we can use the `*ngIf` directive in the template. The `*ngIf` directive takes a boolean value and renders the element if the value is true. The syntax for `*ngIf` directive is as follows:

```html
<div *ngIf="user.isAdmin">
  <p>User is an admin</p>
</div>
```

In the above code, `*ngIf="user.isAdmin"` is the syntax for `*ngIf` directive. The `user.isAdmin` is a boolean value that determines whether the element should be rendered or not. If the value of `user.isAdmin` is true, the element will be rendered on the page, otherwise, it will not be rendered.

Note: To use `*ngIf` directive, you need to add `NgIf` to the `imports` array in the `@NgModule` decorator in the `app.module.ts` file.

```typescript
import { NgModule } from '@angular/core';
import { NgIf } from '@angular/common';
import { BrowserModule } from '@angular/platform-browser';
import { AppComponent } from './app.component';

@NgModule({
  imports: [BrowserModule, NgIf],
  declarations: [AppComponent],
  bootstrap: [AppComponent]
})
export class AppModule {}
```

The `*ngIf` directive can also be used with an `else` block to render a different element if the condition is false. The syntax for using an `else` block with `*ngIf` directive is as follows:

```html
<div *ngIf="user.isAdmin; else notAdmin">
  <p>User is an admin</p>
</div>
<ng-template #notAdmin>
  <p>User is not an admin</p>
</ng-template>
```

In the above code, `*ngIf="user.isAdmin; else notAdmin"` is the syntax for using an `else` block with `*ngIf` directive. The `else notAdmin` is a reference to the `ng-template` block that will be rendered if the condition is false. If the value of `user.isAdmin` is true, the first element will be rendered on the page, otherwise, the `ng-template` block will be rendered.

The `*ngIf` directive is a powerful tool in Angular that allows us to conditionally render elements based on a condition. For more information on how to use the `*ngIf` directive, you can refer to the [Angular documentation](https://angular.dev/api/common/NgIf).

**[⬆️ back to top](#table-of-contents)**

### **Using `@if`**

Angular provides a modern syntax for conditional rendering called `@if` which can be used to conditionally render elements based on a condition. The syntax for `@if` directive is as follows:

```html
@if (user.isAdmin) {
  <p>User is an admin</p>
}
```

In the above code, `@if (user.isAdmin)` is the syntax for `@if` directive. The `user.isAdmin` is a boolean value that determines whether the element should be rendered or not. If the value of `user.isAdmin` is true, the element will be rendered on the page, otherwise, it will not be rendered.

The `@if` directive can also be used with an `else` block to render a different element if the condition is false. The syntax for using an `else` block with `@if` directive is as follows:

```html
@if (user.isAdmin) {
  <p>User is an admin</p>
} else {
  <p>User is not an admin</p>
}
```

In the above code, `@if (user.isAdmin)` is the syntax for using an `else` block with `@if` directive. If the value of `user.isAdmin` is true, the first element will be rendered on the page, otherwise, the second element will be rendered.

The `@if` directive is a modern syntax for conditional rendering in Angular and provides a more concise and readable way to conditionally render elements based on a condition. For more information on how to use the `@if` directive, you can refer to the [Angular documentation](https://angular.dev/api/core/@if).

**[⬆️ back to top](#table-of-contents)**

---

<div style="display: flex; justify-content: space-between">
    <a href="./3.%20State%20Management%20and%20Change%20Detection.md"><b>⬅️ State Management and Change Detection</b></a>
    <a href="../README.md"><b>🏠 Go Home</b></a>
</div>

---