# **Beyond the Basics: Deep Dive into Angular Data Management** <!-- omit in toc -->

Angular provides powerful tools for managing data in your application, from defining models to handling data transformations and storage. By understanding these concepts, you can build robust applications that handle data effectively and efficiently. This guide explores advanced data management techniques in Angular, including models, pipes, services, and local storage.

## **Table of Contents** <!-- omit in toc -->

- [**Models in Angular**](#models-in-angular)
  - [**Defining Models**](#defining-models)
    - [**Types (Aliases)**](#types-aliases)
    - [**Interfaces (Contracts)**](#interfaces-contracts)
    - [**Classes (Blueprints)**](#classes-blueprints)
  - [**Where Models are Used in Angular**](#where-models-are-used-in-angular)
  - [**Choosing the Right Approach**](#choosing-the-right-approach)
- [**Content Projection: NgContent**](#content-projection-ngcontent)
  - [**Basic Content Projection**](#basic-content-projection)
  - [**Multiple Content Projections**](#multiple-content-projections)
- [**Pipes**](#pipes)
  - [**Built-in Pipes**](#built-in-pipes)
  - [**Custom Pipes**](#custom-pipes)
- [**Services**](#services)
  - [**What is a Service?**](#what-is-a-service)
  - [**Need of Service**](#need-of-service)
  - [**Creating a Service**](#creating-a-service)
  - [**Using a Service in a Component**](#using-a-service-in-a-component)
    - [**Traditional Approach**](#traditional-approach)
    - [**Dependency Injection**](#dependency-injection)
    - [**Inject()**](#inject)
- [**Local Storage**](#local-storage)
  - [**Usage**](#usage)
  - [**Example**](#example)
  - [**When to Use Local Storage**](#when-to-use-local-storage)


## **Models in Angular**

Models are the cornerstones of your Angular application. They represent the data structures that hold the information your application works with, such as user information, product details, or shopping cart items.  TypeScript, the language behind Angular, provides three primary ways to define these models: types, interfaces, and classes. Choosing the right approach depends on the complexity of your data and the functionalities you need.

### **Defining Models**

#### **Types (Aliases)**

- **Definition:** Types are essentially shortcuts for existing types. They provide a way to create custom names for complex data structures, improving code readability.
- **Usage:** Use types for simple data structures like arrays of strings or objects with basic properties.

```typescript
type Product = {
  id: number;
  name: string;
  price: number;
};

let products: Product[] = [
  { id: 1, name: 'Headphones', price: 99.99 },
  // ... more products
];
```

**[⬆️ back to top](#table-of-contents)**

#### **Interfaces (Contracts)**

- **Definition:**  Interfaces define the structure (properties and methods) that an object should adhere to. They act as contracts, ensuring consistency and type safety across your application.
- **Usage:** Use interfaces for complex data structures with multiple properties and potential methods. They are ideal for defining contracts between components or services.

```typescript
interface User {
  id: number;
  name: string;
  email: string;
  greet(message: string): string; // Optional method
}
```

**[⬆️ back to top](#table-of-contents)**

#### **Classes (Blueprints)**

- **Definition:** Classes are blueprints for creating objects with properties and methods. They encapsulate data and provide functionalities associated with that data.
- **Usage:** Use classes for complex objects with behavior and logic. They are well-suited for object-oriented programming scenarios.

```typescript
class User {
  id: number;
  name: string;
  email: string;

  constructor(id: number, name: string, email: string) {
    this.id = id;
    this.name = name;
    this.email = email;
  }

  greet(message: string) {
    return `${message}, ${this.name}!`;
  }
}
```

In this example, the `User` class defines a user object with properties and a constructor to create instances. You can use this class to model complex objects with behavior.

**Key Points:**

- Classes define objects with behavior.
- They encapsulate data and methods.
- Use classes for object-oriented programming.
- Classes can implement interfaces for type safety.
- Classes can extend other classes for inheritance.
- Classes can be instantiated to create objects.

**[⬆️ back to top](#table-of-contents)**

### **Where Models are Used in Angular**

Models are used throughout your Angular application to represent and manage data:

- **Components:** Models define the data properties a component interacts with. Components can display data from models, handle user input that updates models, and pass model data to other components.
- **Services:** Models are used to structure the data that services manage or share between components.
- **Forms:** Models provide the structure for form data, ensuring that user input conforms to the expected data format.
- **Routing:** Models can be used to store data related to routing, such as route parameters or query strings.

**[⬆️ back to top](#table-of-contents)**

### **Choosing the Right Approach**

The choice between types, interfaces, and classes depends on the complexity of your data and the functionalities you need:

- **Simple data structures:** Use types for basic data.
- **Complex data structures with type safety:** Use interfaces for contracts and type enforcement.
- **Complex data structures with behavior and logic:** Use classes for object-oriented programming with encapsulated data and methods.

By effectively defining and utilizing models, you can build a well-structured, maintainable, and type-safe Angular application.


**[⬆️ back to top](#table-of-contents)**

## **Content Projection: NgContent**

Content projection, also known as `ng-content`, allows you to pass content to a component dynamically. This feature enables you to create flexible and reusable components that can display different content based on the context in which they are used. By using content projection, you can build components that are more versatile and adaptable to various scenarios.

### **Basic Content Projection**

To use content projection in Angular, you can define a component with an `ng-content` tag in its template. The content projected into the component will replace the `ng-content` tag in the component's template.

```typescript
import { Component } from '@angular/core';

@Component({
  selector: 'app-card',
  template: `
    <div class="card">
      <div class="card-header">
        <h2>Card Title</h2>
      </div>
      <div class="card-content">
        <ng-content></ng-content>
      </div>
    </div>
  `,
  styles: [`
    /* card styles */
  `]
})
export class CardComponent {}
```

In this example, the `CardComponent` defines a card layout with a title and content section. The `ng-content` tag is used to project content into the card component. When you use the `CardComponent` in another component, you can pass content that will be displayed within the card's content section.

```html
<app-card>
  <p>This is the content of the card.</p>
</app-card>
```

By using content projection, you can create reusable components that can adapt to different content requirements. This flexibility allows you to build more modular and maintainable applications.

**[⬆️ back to top](#table-of-contents)**

### **Multiple Content Projections**

You can define multiple ng-content elements with different selectors to project content into specific areas of the child component:

```typescript
import { Component } from '@angular/core';

@Component({
  selector: 'app-card',
  template: `
    <div class="card">
      <div class="card-header">
        <ng-content select=".card-title"></ng-content>
      </div>
      <div class="card-content">
        <ng-content></ng-content>
      </div>
      <div class="card-footer">
        <ng-content select=".card-footer"></ng-content>
      </div>
    </div>
  `,
  styles: [`
    /* card styles */
  `]
})
export class CardComponent {}
```

In this example, the `CardComponent` has two content projection areas: one for the card title and another for the card content. By using the `select` attribute with the `ng-content` tag, you can specify which content should be projected into each area.

```html
<app-card>
  <h2 class="card-title">Card Title</h2>
  <p>This is the content of the card.</p>
  <div class="card-footer">Card Footer</div>
</app-card>
```

Alternatively you can also use attrubute selector to project content into specific areas of the child component:

```typescript
import { Component } from '@angular/core';

@Component({
  selector: 'app-card',
  template: `
    <div class="card">
      <div class="card-header">
        <ng-content select="[card-title]"></ng-content>
      </div>
      <div class="card-content">
        <ng-content></ng-content>
      </div>
      <div class="card-footer">
        <ng-content select="[card-footer]"></ng-content>
      </div>
    </div>
  `,
  styles: [`
    /* card styles */
  `]
})
export class CardComponent {}
```

```html
<app-card>
  <h2 card-title>Card Title</h2>
  <p>This is the content of the card.</p>
  <div card-footer>Card Footer</div>
</app-card>
```
OR

```typescript
import { Component } from '@angular/core';

@Component({
  selector: 'app-card',
  template: `
    <div class="card">
      <ng-content select="[slot='title']"></ng-content>
      <ng-content select="[slot='content']"></ng-content>
    </div>
  `,
  styles: [`
    /* card styles */
  `]
})
export class CardComponent {}
```

```html
<app-card>
  <h1 slot="title">Card Title</h1>
  <p slot="content">Card Content</p>
</app-card>
```

By defining multiple content projection areas, you can create components with more granular control over the content that is projected into different sections of the component.

**[⬆️ back to top](#table-of-contents)**

## **Pipes**

Pipes are pure functions that accept an input value and transform it into a desired output format for display. They are used to format data within templates without cluttering component logic.

**Syntax:**

```html
{{ value | pipeName }}
{{ value | pipeName:arg1:arg2:... }}
```

### **Built-in Pipes**

Angular provides several built-in pipes for common transformations:

- **DatePipe:** 
  - Formats a date value according to locale rules.
  - **Usage:** 
    - Import `DatePipe` from `@angular/common` into imports array.
    - Add `{{ today | date }}` to the desired location. `today` is a variable storing date string.
    - Configuring the pipe to display date in different format`{{ today | date:'fullDate' }}`
  - Documentation: [DatePipe](https://angular.dev/api/common/DatePipe) 
- **UpperCasePipe:**
  - Converts text to uppercase.
  - **Usage:** `{{ text | uppercase }}`
  - Documentation: [UpperCasePipe](https://angular.dev/api/common/UpperCasePipe)
- **LowerCasePipe:** Converts text to lowercase.
  - **Usage:** `{{ text | lowercase }}`
  - Documentation: [LowerCasePipe](https://angular.dev/api/common/LowerCasePipe)
- **CurrencyPipe:**
  - Formats a number as currency.
  - **Usage:** `{{ price | currency }}`
  - Documentation: [CurrencyPipe](https://angular.dev/api/common/CurrencyPipe)
- **DecimalPipe:**
  - Formats a number as decimal.
  - **Usage:** `{{ value | number }}`
  - Documentation: [DecimalPipe](https://angular.dev/api/common/DecimalPipe)
- **JSONPipe:**
  - Converts a value into its JSON-format representation. Useful for debugging.
  - **Usage:** `{{ object | json }}`
  - Documentation: [JSONPipe](https://angular.dev/api/common/JsonPipe)

**[⬆️ back to top](#table-of-contents)**

### **Custom Pipes**

While the built-in pipes can be a great fit to perform common operations you often need some custom logic to transform the data. You can create custom pipes by implementing the `PipeTransform` interface and defining the `transform` method.

**Example:**

```typescript
import { Pipe, PipeTransform } from '@angular/core';

@Pipe({
  name: 'filter'
})
export class FilterPipe implements PipeTransform {
  transform(value: any[], filter: string): any[] {
    return value.filter(item => item.name.includes(filter));
  }
}
```

In this example, the `FilterPipe` class implements the `PipeTransform` interface and defines the `transform` method. The `transform` method accepts an array of items and a filter string, and it filters the items based on the filter criteria.

**[⬆️ back to top](#table-of-contents)**

## **Services**

### **What is a Service?**

A service is a reusable class in Angular that encapsulates logic or data that can be shared across multiple components. It's a way to promote code reusability, maintainability, and testability in your application.

### **Need of Service**

Imaging you have two components `UserListComponent` and `TaskListComponent` which displays a list of users and list of tasks respectively. The requirement is to show tasks associated with a specific user when that user is selected in the UserListComponent.

One way to achieve this is to use a service to store the selected user and tasks data. The `UserListComponent` can update the selected user in the service, and the `TaskListComponent` can retrieve the selected user and display the associated tasks.

### **Creating a Service**

To create a service in Angular, you can use the Angular CLI to generate a service file:

```bash
ng generate service <service-name>
```

Alternatively, you can create a service manually by creating a TypeScript file with the service logic:

```typescript
import { Injectable } from '@angular/core';

@Injectable({
  providedIn: 'root'
})
export class TasksService {
  tasks: Task[] = [
    { id: 1, userId: 1, title: 'Task 1', summary: 'Summary 1' },
    { id: 2, userId: 1, title: 'Task 2', summary: 'Summary 2' },
    { id: 3, userId: 2, title: 'Task 3', summary: 'Summary 3' },
    // more tasks
  ];

  getTasksByUserId(userId: number): Task[] {
    return this.tasks.filter(task => task.userId === userId);
  }

  addTask(task: Task, userId: number) {
    this.tasks.push({ ...task, userId });
  }

  removeTask(taskId: number) {
    this.tasks = this.tasks.filter(task => task.id !== taskId);
  }
}
```

In this example, the `TasksService` class defines a service that manages tasks data. It provides methods to get tasks by user ID, add tasks, and remove tasks. The service is marked as `@Injectable` to allow Angular to inject it into components. The `providedIn: 'root'` metadata ensures that the service is a singleton and available throughout the application.

### **Using a Service in a Component**

There are different ways to use a service in an Angular component:

#### **Traditional Approach**

You can use create a new instance of the service in every component where you want to use it:

```typescript
import { Component } from '@angular/core';
import { TasksService } from './tasks.service';

@Component({
  selector: 'app-task-list',
  template: `
    <ul>
      <li *ngFor="let task of tasks">{{ task.title }}</li>
    </ul>
  `
})
export class TaskListComponent {
  tasks: Task[];
  private tasksService: TasksService = new TasksService();

  constructor() {
    this.tasks = this.tasksService.getTasksByUserId(1);
  }
}
```

This approach creates a new instance of the service in the component, which can lead to multiple instances of the service across the application. It's not recommended for services that need to be shared across components.

#### **Dependency Injection**

Angular provides a built-in dependency injection system that allows you to inject services into components:

```typescript
import { Component } from '@angular/core';
import { TasksService } from './tasks.service';

@Component({
  selector: 'app-task-list',
  template: `
    <ul>
      <li *ngFor="let task of tasks">{{ task.title }}</li>
    </ul>
  `
})
export class TaskListComponent {
  tasks: Task[];

  constructor(private tasksService: TasksService) {
    this.tasks = this.tasksService.getTasksByUserId(1);
  }
}
```

In this example, the `TasksService` is injected into the `TaskListComponent` constructor. Angular's dependency injection system ensures that the service is a singleton and shared across components. This approach promotes code reusability and maintainability by centralizing service logic.

It is same as writing

```typescript
private tasksService: TasksService;

constructor(tasksService: TasksService) {
  this.tasksService = tasksService;
}
```

#### **Inject()**

You can also use `inject()` function to inject a service into a component:

```typescript
import { Component, inject } from '@angular/core';
import { TasksService } from './tasks.service';

@Component({
  selector: 'app-task-list',
  template: `
    <ul>
      <li *ngFor="let task of tasks">{{ task.title }}</li>
    </ul>
  `
})
export class TaskListComponent {
  tasks: Task[];
  tasksService = inject(TasksService);

  constructor() {
    this.tasks = this.tasksService.getTasksByUserId(1);
  }
}
```

The `inject()` function allows you to manually inject a service into a component. While this approach provides more control over service injection, it's not as commonly used as Angular's built-in dependency injection system.

**[⬆️ back to top](#table-of-contents)**

## **Local Storage**

Local storage is a browser feature that allows you to store data on the client side. It provides a way to persist data across sessions and browser refreshes, enabling you to create applications that remember user preferences, settings, or data.

### **Usage**

You can use local storage in Angular to store and retrieve data:

```typescript
// Storing data
localStorage.setItem('key', 'value');

// Retrieving data
const value = localStorage.getItem('key');
```

### **Example**

Imagine you have a user settings component where users can set their preferences. You can use local storage to store and retrieve these settings:

```typescript
import { Component } from '@angular/core';

@Component({
  selector: 'app-user-settings',
  template: `
    <label for="theme">Theme:</label>
    <select id="theme" (change)="setTheme($event.target.value)">
      <option value="light">Light</option>
      <option value="dark">Dark</option>
    </select>
  `
})
export class UserSettingsComponent {
  setTheme(theme: string) {
    localStorage.setItem('theme', theme);
  }
}
```

In this example, the `UserSettingsComponent` allows users to select a theme preference. When the user selects a theme, the `setTheme` method is called to store the theme preference in local storage.

```typescript
import { Component } from '@angular/core';

@Component({
  selector: 'app-root',
  template: `
    <div [ngClass]="{ 'light-theme': theme === 'light', 'dark-theme': theme === 'dark' }">
      <app-user-settings></app-user-settings>
    </div>
  `,
  styles: [`
    .light-theme { background-color: #f0f0f0; }
    .dark-theme { background-color: #333; color: #fff; }
  `]
})
export class AppComponent {
  theme: string = localStorage.getItem('theme') || 'light';
}
```

In the `AppComponent`, the theme preference is retrieved from local storage and applied to the root component. The theme class is dynamically added based on the selected theme, allowing users to see their preferred theme across sessions.

### **When to Use Local Storage**

Local storage is useful for storing small amounts of data that need to persist across sessions. It's commonly used for user preferences, settings, or data that doesn't require server-side storage. However, local storage has limitations, such as a 5MB storage limit and data that is not encrypted. For sensitive data or larger data sets, consider using server-side storage or other secure storage solutions.

Another note is that you can only store strings in local storage. If you need to store complex objects, you can serialize them to JSON before storing and parse them back when retrieving. 

```typescript
// Storing complex object
const user = { id: 1, name: 'John Doe' };
localStorage.setItem('user', JSON.stringify(user));

// Retrieving complex object
const user = JSON.parse(localStorage.getItem('user'));
```

By leveraging local storage in your Angular application, you can create a more personalized and user-friendly experience for your users.

**[⬆️ back to top](#table-of-contents)**

---

<div style="display: flex; justify-content: space-between">
    <a href="./5.%20Styling%20and%20User%20Interaction.md">
      <b>⬅️ Dynamic CSS and Two-way Data Binding</b>
    </a>
    <a href="../README.md"><b>🏠 Go Home</b></a>
    <a href="./7.%20Structuring%20Your%20Angular%20Application%20with%20Modules.md">
      <b>Structuring Angular Applications with Modules ➡️</b>
    </a>
</div>

---